As you were a new faculty member, were there any guidelines, rules, spoken or unspoken for a new faculty member?
No.
It was just being a new, there weren't many, of course, at any one time, and there wasn't any program for them.
That's one thing that you recall we did when we were in our administrative positions as,
Dean of faculties and vice president, we put this in, which I think has been a help, but we were on our own.
At any one year, there weren't many of us.
What hours did you assume that you were expected to be present for duty?
Oh, that's easy.
Monday through Friday, 8 to 5, and Saturday, 8 to 12.
In addition to that, of course, if you're doing research, you're back after five.
All right, let's see.
Could you and your wife go to a party where alcohol was served off campus?
Yeah.
Okay.
Could, let's see, could anybody smoke in their office?
Oh, yes.
In fact, all of us did.
Where did y'all eat lunch in those days?
I lived so close to the campus that I came home.
My original office and lab were in the old Animal Industry Building.
The campus was not, well, you remember that it wasn't as congested by a tenth of what it is now.
I could simply drive out
the south side and get on Jersey and come home, and we lived the first house on Kyle Avenue.
So I could just drive home for lunch, see Kitty and Steve, and then Donnie was born in 53, so I could, until they were in school, of course, I'd see them at lunch.
A lot of people would go to the MSC and eat.
If they were not going to leave the campus, they would go to the MSC.
And if you had a very special guest that you wanted to take to lunch, you'd take them, I presume, to the MSC?
Yes.
I can't think of any other place we would have taken them in those days.
Let's make believe that you and Kitty had a couple of dear friends, a couple that were dear friends, a married couple, that were here visiting you, and you wanted to take them out to dinner.
Where would you have those early years?
We're talking about before the Texan was established, which would be about, what, 1960, roughly?
I think so.
I don't know.
I can't think.
I can't think of anything out here.
About the only thing I have is Hotard's Cafeteria on Main Street in downtown Bryan.
Youngbloods, but I don't think I ever went there.
Arnold's wouldn't have been.
No, it wasn't in existence.
It came along later.
Let's see, oh, I remember one time Fred Benson, see if you agree with this, Fred Benson told me that he had the impression that he or any other faculty member were not to do any gambling, any playing cards for money, unless they closed the shades of the blinds.
I never had that impression.
I don't know whether he was teasing me or not.
I don't know.
This was some years ago.
All right, back to, so when did, and you had some graduate students very early.
Let's see, my first graduate student was, must have come in 54, something like that, for a master's.
Did you recruit that student, or did he just show up?
I don't remember.
I certainly offered him an assistantship, and I can't remember how I met him.
He's long since dead now, unfortunately.
I can't remember.
And then my first PhD student was Charles Wilms, who I had a recruiting
channel that went to Southwest Texas and there were two or three people over there who would call me when they had a promising prospect and send them over.
W.E.
Norris, who had been a class ahead of me at Southwest Texas, was head of biology over there and he called and recommended this student who had taken a master's with them, bachelor's I guess from UT and master's at Southwest Texas.
and turned out to be Charles Wilms who finished here, went back to Southwest Texas in the chemistry department and had a long career there serving as department head and just retired this past year.
But anyhow, one thing I was impressed with, when he had not finished his thesis when he went over there, he taught four different courses.
The fall that he left here, he taught four courses of chemistry.
The department had assigned him that so he would familiarize himself with all these branches of chemistry, refresh his memory.
But the guy wrote his dissertation in addition to that in a semester.
And I don't think a week passed without my getting a chapter in the mail.
Anyhow, he was my first PhD.
I don't remember when my first master's came.
He came in 56.
Charles Williams came in 56.
When did you first begin to feel that you were measuring up to the expectations that the senior faculty may have had for you as a junior colleague?
I guess maybe when I got promoted in 57.
Six, I guess it was.
To associate.
To associate professor, yeah.
Did anybody give you, at the end of the first or second year, an annual evaluation?
No.
Comment?
Never.
Not in the whole 30-some-odd years.
Now, did the department have regular meetings in those years?
No.
It was one of the loosest organizations you can conceive of.
Registration then was Fieldhouse, either in G. Raleigh or at Cebiza.
And you all worked?
Yeah, take a shift.
Now, some people like Kunkel and Couch had joint appointments with other departments, Couch and Poultry and Kunkel and Animal Science, and so they would
take part of their registration assignment with those departments, but we all took a turn at registering.
Was there a big, momentous research grant that you remember you got that really was a special thrill?
Yes.
The Robert A. Welch grant
dr lyman is the lead investigator and um i guess dr james liverman and i were we we helped write the thing and but we were not listed as principal investigators later i was but that must have come about in about 57 i guess mr welch died about
54 or five and left this this huge fortune to chemical research in the state of texas 25 million dollars i have no idea how how many multiples of that have already been given out in grants but it was wisely invested and it just took off and uh that was a a watershed i would say the welch grant and then later i was added as a principal investigator then still later dr lyman and i
went separate ways, and I kept the old grant, he got a new one, and we did different things.
With that grant, describe your primary research instances.
It was on proteins and amino acids, mostly metabolism at that time, later physical characterization of enzymes,
It enabled us to buy some equipment that we couldn't have got otherwise, expensive stuff that we couldn't have afforded otherwise.
And your research lab was set up where?
Until 57, it was in the old Animal Industry Building.
Then in 57, we moved to what was known as the Herman F. Heap Building,
Now, I think there are three heat buildings on campus, but it's the one across Spence Street from Animal Industries and down from the, what we used to call a pavilion.
I don't know what it is.
It's registration headquarters now, isn't it?
Okay.
And we shared it with Dairy Science.
It always irritated me, and I'll put this for the record.
It always irritated me.
It was billed as the Dairy Biochemistry Building.
and there is a discipline of dairy biochemistry, and it always irritated me that they left the and out of the designation.
Was it named HEAP originally?
No, it must have been named the HEAP building about, I would guess about two years later, but surely there must be a record of this, but it was just a dairy biochemistry building, and then later,
You see, Mr. Heap was one of our regents and he died sometime in the late 50s I guess or around 1960 and then it must have been at about that time it was named for him.
You know we used not to name buildings for living people.
Right.
By the way, I'll put this on the record.
That's a good rule.
I agree.
It seems to me it would be appropriate that it
I'll put in a fuzz word, normally, meaning it could be an exception, but that'd be darn good.
Normally, don't name it someone unless they are deceased, or they give... A lot of money.
A lot of money, and that means a huge portion.
Up front.
Up front, yeah.
The idea of naming a building for someone in the hopes that he will then give you the money is fatuous nonsense, because once the building's named for them, they have no incentive to give you any money.
That's right.
Did your teaching responsibility, did it change?
Were you still teaching?
I taught that course for years untold, and I enjoyed it.
I think that it will not be boastful to say the course had some local reputation for rigor.
Did you have a nickname as far as you know?
As far as I know, it may have started with an S, but no one ever called me.
I don't remember ever having heard one.
Well, dealing with graduate students, it's a different matter, and small numbers.
And I must have started with, you know, 15 people in the course, something like that.
And then when it grew to 50, I was amazed.
It grew to 50, and there was a really good-looking young woman back about five rows who turned out to be the A-plus student of all of them.
So change came gradually,
and Shirley.
All right, let's see.
In the late 50s, Dr. Harrington had by then become a senior administrator.
I think that he held that position at Bryan Field one year and then became dean of arts and sciences.
When Dr. Brooks, I guess, retired, I think that's right.
Dr. Brooks is dean of the graduate school, and I think he's also dean of arts and sciences.
Dr. Harrington became dean of arts and sciences, and by the way, lived on the campus then.
In that white frame house?
Yes.
Just south of where the MSC, it'd be the MSC parking lot, wouldn't it?
Right.
And then he became,
Did he become dean of the college like John Paul Abbott was later?
I think so.
I think maybe so.
Did anything change for chemistry or biochemistry that y'all could trace to his being?
No.
Y'all didn't get any special?
No, we did not.
Let's go off of that.
Let me yell.
Describe the administration.
and its style during the 50s?
Beginning at the lowest level, department heads were absolute kings of their realms.
They had total authority, which can be good as well as bad, but it can be very bad too.
And they...
They tended to be autocratic, and many of them did.
Then the deans, of course I was in agriculture, and there you realize the dean had relatively little power because so many of the people in agriculture were joint employees of the experiment station and the college, and whichever one of those entities paid the most of the person's salary had the most say in his future.
The deans, I didn't have much dealings with them, many dealings with them.
I do remember that Gus Watkins was a tremendously nice guy and I thought very definitely a scholar, a tremendous scholar, botanist, plant scientist.
And he was my dean for a while.
I did not know Dr. Adams at all, who was a soil scientist, soil physicist, and he wasn't dean for a very long time before he... Now I'm thinking about J. Boyd Page.
Dr. Adams was also agronomy, but I don't remember what.
uh... then the other than it got rather remote has called the there were the vice presidents in those days remember there was a dean of the college and uh... president and a chancellor the chancellorship had been inaugurated and fifty seven when the system was formed and the
departments in agriculture and engineering more or less integrated.
You recall or I'm sure you know that before 1947 there was say an animal husband department in the college, there was one in the experiment station, there was one in the extension service.
Similarly in all of the agricultural departments.
But the chancellorship then went in at that time and Mr.
What was his name?
The first chancellor.
Oh, Gilchrist?
Mr. Gilchrist was a remote figure.
I don't think I ever met him, really, even.
Were there ever school faculty meetings?
Yes.
In agriculture, we would occasionally have a faculty meeting, and the dean would be...
presiding or maybe the director of the experiment station or someone would at least be there to speak probably.
Dr. Lewis was for a long time the director of the experiment station.
R.D.
Lewis.
Lewis, uh-huh.
And he was, I believe his background was agronomy, I'm not sure.
He was a native of, I believe, Ohio,
and had had considerable experience there.
I got personally acquainted with Dr. Lewis and got along fine with him.
There was one thing that you had to get permission to go to the research foundation for a grant.
And this particularly became sticky after overhead went into effect.
I have the distinction of having the first grant to the College of Agriculture where overhead was charged.
And that was a decision not
from the experiment station, but from the system.
My grand approval came through Dr. Lewis.
I may have been in the office to talk to Vic Schimber, who is the associate director
And Dr. Lewis called me into his office, which is next door, and said, you've got approval from the NIH for your NIH grant has been approved by the system.
It says subject to 15% overhead and so forth.
He said, I said, we don't charge overheads.
That must mean subject to not more than 15% being taken out.
But don't worry about, sure enough, it was taken out.
And I had not put, I had not calculated it in my grant.
And I later had words with my friend Mr. Calvin Ray Guest about this, who was the auditor who recommended that we start charging.
At the system level?
At the system level.
And I presume down through the years that has been one of the items of contention
about where that money then goes.
Absolutely.
When I was dean of science, that was the hardest nut I ever tried to crack and then never did crack it.
It started out at 15%, you said.
That's what this one was.
That's what it meant.
Yeah.
And eventually got to be how much over the years?
I think probably the most common thing was 40% of salaries and wages.
That's what I thought.
This was 15% of the total.
Now, there was never a campus-wide faculty meeting, was there, in those early years?
The only ones I can recall were the ones where the Distinguished Achievement Awards were made, and that must have started about in the mid or late 50s, I can't recall, something like that.
And those were the only ones I recall, general faculty meetings.
Do you remember any reaction, you and your colleagues, when Earl Rudder became the chief executive officer of the institution?
There were probably a lot of remarks about his military background and about his lack of academic preparation, I think.
That probably was one of the things that you could hear.
I'm assuming that y'all faculty, typical faculty in those years, didn't see nor hear much directly from board members.
Oh, no.
The board of directors came and went?
They came and went.
I think the first time I ever saw them was when they had me in to approve me for a dean of science.
And by the way, in those days, the meetings were not open.
There was a campus policeman at the door, and you went in when you were invited, and when your turn came, the policeman opened the door and ushered you in.
Right.
In the 60s, Mr. Rudder, his president,
Board meetings were held where?
In the old board of directors' residence, the old wooden frame building across the side street from Beza Hall.
And that's where they spent the night?
They stayed there.
They had rooms, and it was a fairly large house, two or three stories.
Mrs. Cashin was their hostess.
And then there was the front and the second story in the front.
There was a large room, and that was the board meeting room.
Did you have any interaction with President Erl Rudder?
Not until I became Dean of Science.
When was that?
1970.
Well, casually, I remember one time I was showing a prospective faculty member through the system building and happened to come face to face with him
there at the stairs, and I introduced him to the prospective faculty member.
I said, now, Mr. Rudder, I'm Mac Prescott.
He said, yes, I know at our house you're known as Kitty's husband.
But then when I, Dr. Byers is the one who called me over and talked to me about becoming Dean of Science.
And then he and I went to see Mr. Rudder.
All right, as far as you know, how did you get identified
by Byers or whomever for that task?
Somehow my curriculum vitae made its way to Dr. Byers and he saw a respectable number of publications, a respectable number of grants through the years and it may have been passed to him by
somebody else in the administration.
My curriculum vitae would have been on file in Dr. Suttle's office, for example, who handled research grants.
And Dr. Byers was evidently impressed that it looked like I was really a scientist, and so he decided he would talk to me about becoming Dean.
Now, he was a very highly regarded scholar nationally.
Oh, yes.
He was a member of the National Academy.
Come from Chicago?
He came from the University of Chicago.
He had graduated at Berkeley.
Now, who preceded you as Dean of Science?
Dr. Byers was acting for about a year and a half, I believe.
I can't remember who, but Clarence Zener had been the first dean of science, a very distinguished mathematical physicist.
So that in a way, this is moving you organizationally from agriculture... Into science.
...into science.
Correct, yeah.
At my request, I kept my professorship in biochemistry.
And there was no search committee... No.
...in those days.
It was Dr. Byers.
Yes.
Do you remember anything when he invited you over?
Did you know what the conversation was going to be about?
Dr. Suttle had called and said, Dr. Byers wants to talk to you and don't let on that I've let you know this.
It's about becoming dean of science, which shocked me that I'm sure Dr. Byers wouldn't have recognized me.
You had been department head?
Department head.
For how long?
Oh, I've been acting for a year and head for a year, something like that.
So not long?
Not long, yeah.
And I presume you had not made anybody, you had not indicated anybody that you wanted to be an administrator.
No.
because you, I have the impression you thoroughly enjoyed your research.
When you then met with Dr. Byers, do you remember, did you feel you were being interviewed, that you were being measured?
No.
I had the feeling he was going to offer me the job.
He said, now as you know,
The deanship of science has been open and said, there's been a move on to attract some really prominent scientists there.
In fact, I knew that they tried, I think that they'd offered the job to Christian Anfinson at the NIH.
He was a Nobel laureate and so forth.
And he said, but this thing doesn't work out.
And sometimes I like it's better for us to look among our own people and said, I've looked at your record and said, you've done very well.
You're one of the real scientists over there in agriculture.
We may need to strike that, but that's what he said.
And so he said, just want you to talk to Mr. Rudder about becoming dean of science.
Did he take you over too?
Either then or shortly thereafter.
Was it a one-on-one with Mr. Rudder?
No, but Dr. Byers was there too.
And what was the nature of Mr. Rudder's?
He just wanted to be sure that I was going to push to the best of my ability to make the science college an outstanding organization, that I was not going to let the wild people in any department run me, which I don't believe they ever did.
Did he give you any guidelines?
No, and I thought it over and I called Dr. Byers and said, I don't believe I want to do this.
And Dr. Byers said, meet me Mr. Rudders at 10 o'clock tomorrow morning.
So we walked in and Mr. Rudders said, sit down here, Mac.
Do you remember how his desk was?
There was a chair right at the end of his desk.
Sit down here.
He said, now, Mac, we've already passed this juncture of whether you're going to be deemed science.
We're past that.
Now, what are you going to do about those people over in so-and-so and so-and-so?
And I said, well, Mr. Rudder, if I have the backing, I said, those people in physics got, and I named a prominent physicist and administrator, I said, those people got him.
And there are people like that in every department.
And so I just want to be sure that I'm going to have the, he said, no, no, he got himself.
But he said, I just want to be sure that I've got your backing, the backing of the central administration to do whatever I need to do over there.
You've got it?
OK.
We'll take you before the board at the next meeting.
Does the board ask any questions?
They said, tell us about yourself.
Where are you from?
Who do you marry?
How many kids do you have?
That was it.
Let's back up and talk about Andy Suttle.
He came under Mr. Rutter as vice president?
Vice president for research.
Do you know who identified him?
Well, I strongly suspect that the Welch Foundation, Mr. Dr. Milligan, Dr. W. Milligan, was the scientific director of the Welch Foundation.
And I've always had the impression somehow that he highly recommended Dr. Sutton.
And what was his primary function as vice president for research?
Apparently, the best I can tell to review grad applications as they went out, I suppose to keep in contact with the National Science Foundation and people of that
Sort I never did really understand the nature of the position and when Jack Williams came in he said I have no Place in my organization that belongs under the vice president for academic affairs and I agree with that organization so I know I was never really clear except that he was another hurdle in the
in the obstacle race to get it off campus when you're doing a proposal.
And don't I remember that he had one of his many eccentricities was wearing two watches?
Two watches and he wrote in green ink.
Yeah, yeah.
And those of us over in the humanities I remember one day were very, very enraged
He lectured to us as a big faculty group over in the chemistry lecture hall that the first way you measure the quality of research is how much money does it bring in, that non-sponsored research
isn't worth anything.
That doesn't surprise me.
In history, that bothered us a great deal.
Yeah, I can see that in my... Let's see.
Wayne Hall.
Describe your view of him as the chief academic officer under Mr. Rutter.
Oh, Wayne and I were Indians together, and he got to be a chief fairly young in life, but I'd always had good relations with Wayne.
He'd come out of plant science, and matter of fact, I believe he won the first research award from the Association of Former Students and didn't even have an experiment station appointment, which tells you how good he must have been at getting money and getting the research out.
Wayne and I always had excellent rapport, no difficulty there.
And I have the impression that in a quiet manner one-on-one, Earl Rudder would listen to Wayne Hall about academic matters.
Oh, I think there's no doubt about that.
I think that Wayne had a great influence on Mr. Rudder.
All right.
Great changes made in Mr. Rutter's early years of coeducation, voluntary corps, and so forth.
Were you at all involved in that century study?
Were you on any of the committees that made any recommendations?
I don't recall.
What was your, you and your colleagues, what was your reaction at these proposed changes?
My general feeling is that
that they were widely approved.
The idea of coeducation, compulsory cohort being terminated I think was a very popular decision.
That may have been made before Mr. Rudder came.
I can't remember.
No, no.
It was not.
I remember very much.
You were here already.
I wrote the first draft and I remember getting back from Wayne Hall the copy with Mr. Rudder's candid comments in the margin and some of them were very strong.
and Hall asked me to take it, revise it, bring it in line with Mr. Rudder's comments.
And I go back two days later and said, sir, I cannot in good faith make many of these.
And he said, why?
And I said, because the committee really believes these are our subjective opinions.
We may be in error, but we really believe that coeducation, voluntary core, and so forth is in order.
And he said, I'll stake my job on your right to say what the committee really believes.
Let's see.
Okay, then back to your beginning as dean.
And that's what year?
1970, yeah.
The board met in November of 69.